Large Group Plan
Shield Spectrum/Full PPO Disclosure Form (101+)
Provider Network: Full PPO

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

Blue Shield of California is an independent member of the Blue Shield Association

Important Disclosures

2

Table of contents
Table of contents ........................................................................................................................2
Notice ..........................................................................................................................................3
General disclosures ...................................................................................................................4
Principal Benefits and coverages ..........................................................................................4
Principal exclusions and limitations on Benefits....................................................................5
Prepayments fees ..................................................................................................................11
Other charges ........................................................................................................................11
Choice of Physicians and providers ....................................................................................14
Second medical opinion ......................................................................................................15
Continuity of care ..................................................................................................................15
Care outside of California.....................................................................................................16
Emergency Services ..............................................................................................................17
Reimbursement provisions ....................................................................................................17
Facilities ...................................................................................................................................18
Renewal provisions ................................................................................................................18
Individual continuation of Benefts .......................................................................................18
Termination of Benefits ..........................................................................................................18

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

3

Notice
This disclosure form is only a summary. Consult the Evidence of Coverage and the
Group Health Service Contract to determine the governing contractual provisions.
The Evidence of Coverage (EOC) and the Group Health Service Contract (Contract)
disclose the terms and conditions of your coverage. You should read this disclosure form
and the EOC completely and carefully. If you or a covered family member have
special health care needs, you should read any relevant sections closely.

Consult the health plan benefits and coverage matrix for
additional information.

Applicants for coverage under this plan have a right to view the EOC prior to
enrollment. Applicants may contact Blue Shield for additional information about this
plan’s Benefits. Call Customer Service at (888) 256-1915.
Blue Shield will furnish a copy of the EOC upon request.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

4

General disclosures
Principal Benefits and coverages
Your plan includes certain Benefits and coverages, including coverage for acute and
subacute care. Blue Shield provides coverage for Medically Necessary services and
supplies only. Experimental or Investigational services and supplies are not covered.
All Benefits are subject to:
•
•
•
•

Your Cost Share;
Any Benefit maximums;
The provisions of the Medical Management Programs; and
The terms, conditions, limitations, and exclusions of this EOC.

You can receive many outpatient Benefits in a variety of settings, including your home,
a Physician’s office, an urgent care center, an Ambulatory Surgery Center, or a
Hospital. Blue Shield’s Medical Management Programs work with your provider to
ensure that your care is provided safely and effectively in a setting that is appropriate
to your needs. Your Cost Share for outpatient Benefits may vary depending on where
you receive them.
Review your Summary of Benefits and your EOC to understand the specifics and costs
associated with your principal Benefits and coverages.

Principal Benefits and Coverages
Acupuncture services
Allergy testing and immunotherapy Benefits
Ambulance services
Bariatric surgery Benefits
Chiropractic services
Clinical trials for treatment of cancer or Life-Threatening diseases or conditions
Benefits
Diabetes care services
Diagnostic X-ray, imaging, pathology, laboratory, and other testing services
Dialysis Benefits
Durable medical equipment

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

5

Principal Benefits and Coverages
Emergency Benefits
Family planning and Infertility Benefits
Home health services
Hospice program services
Hospital services
Medical treatment of the teeth, gums, jaw joints, and jaw bones
Mental Health or Substance Use Disorder Benefits
Physician and other professional services
PKU formulas and special food products
Podiatric services
Pregnancy and maternity care
Preventive Health Services
Reconstructive Surgery Benefits
Rehabilitative and habilitative services
Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) services
Transplant services
Urgent care services

Principal exclusions and limitations on Benefits
Review your EOC to learn more about this plan’s general exclusions and limitations.
The Plan does not cover the services or supplies listed below that are excluded from
coverage or exceed limitations as described in the Evidence of Coverage (EOC).
These exclusions and limitations do not apply to Medically Necessary basic health care
services required to be covered under California or federal law, including but not
limited to Medically Necessary treatment of a Mental Health or Substance Use Disorder,
as well as preventive services required to be covered under California or federal law.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

6
These exclusions and limitations do not apply when covered by the Plan or required by
law.

General exclusions and limitations
Clinical Trials.
This Plan does not cover clinical trials, except Approved Clinical Trials as
described in the EOC in the Clinical trials for treatment of cancer or LifeThreatening diseases or conditions Benefits section or as required by law.
Coverage of Approved Clinical Trials does not include the following:
•
•
1

•
•

The investigational drug, item, or service itself.
Drugs, items, devices, and services provided solely to satisfy data
collection and analysis needs that are not used in the direct clinical
management of the Member.
Drugs, items, devices, and services specifically excluded from coverage
in the EOC, except for drugs, items, devices, and services required to be
covered pursuant to state and federal law.
Drugs, items, devices, and services customarily provided free of charge
to a clinical trial participant by the research sponsor.

This exclusion does not limit, prohibit, or modify a Member’s rights to the
Experimental or Investigational services independent review process as
described in the EOC in the Independent Medical Review section, or to the
Independent Medical Review (IMR) from the Department of Managed Health
Care (DMHC) as described in the EOC in the California Department of
Managed Health Care review section.
Cosmetic Services, Supplies, or Surgeries. This Plan does not cover cosmetic
services, supplies, or surgeries that slow down or reverse the effects of aging, or
alter or reshape normal structures of the body in order to improve appearance
rather than function except as described in the EOC in the Reconstructive
Surgery Benefits section, or as required by law. The Plan does not cover any
services, supplies, or surgeries for the promotion, prevention, or other treatment
of hair loss or hair growth except as described in the EOC in the Reconstructive
Surgery Benefits section, or as required by law.
2

This exclusion does not apply to the following:
•
•
•

Medically Necessary treatment of complications resulting from cosmetic
surgery, such as infections or hemorrhages.
Reconstructive surgery as described in the EOC in the Reconstructive
Surgery Benefits section.
For gender dysphoria, reconstructive surgery of primary and secondary
sex characteristics to improve function, or create a normal appearance
to the extent possible, for the gender with which a Member identifies, in
accordance with the standard of care as practiced by physicians

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

7

General exclusions and limitations
specializing in reconstructive surgery who are competent to evaluate the
specific clinical issues involved in the care requested as described in the
EOC in the Reconstructive Surgery Benefits section.
Custodial or Domiciliary Care. This Plan does not cover custodial care, which
involves assistance with activities of daily living, including but not limited to, help
in walking, getting in and out of bed, bathing, dressing, preparation and
feeding of special diets, and supervision of medications that are ordinarily selfadministered, except as required by law.
3

This exclusion does not apply to the following:
•
•
•

Assistance with activities of daily living that requires the regular services
of or is regularly provided by trained medical or health professionals.
Assistance with activities of daily living that is provided as part of covered
hospice, skilled nursing facility, or inpatient hospital care.
Custodial care provided in a healthcare facility.

4

Dental Services. This Plan does not cover dental services or supplies, except as
described in the EOC in the Medical treatment of the teeth, gums, or jaw joints
and jaw bones and Hospital services sections or as required by law.

5

Dietary or Nutritional Supplements. This Plan does not cover dietary or nutritional
supplements, except as described in the EOC in the PKU formulas and special
food products section or as required by law.

6

Disposable Supplies for Home Use. This Plan does not cover disposable supplies
for home use, such as bandages, gauze, tape, antiseptics, dressings, diapers,
and incontinence supplies, except as described in the EOC in the Durable
medical equipment, Home health services, Hospice program services, sections,
or as required by law.
Experimental or Investigational services.
This Plan does not cover Experimental Services or Investigational Services,
except as required by law.

7

Experimental Services means drugs, equipment, procedures or services that are
in a testing phase undergoing laboratory and/or animal studies prior to testing
in humans. Experimental Services are not undergoing a clinical investigation.
Investigational Services means those drugs, equipment, procedures or services
for which laboratory and/or animal studies have been completed and for
which human studies are in progress but:
•
•
•

Testing is not complete; and
The efficacy and safety of such services in human subjects are not
yet established; and
The service is not in wide usage.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

8

General exclusions and limitations
The determination that a service is an Experimental Service or Investigational
Service is based on:
•
Reference to relevant federal regulations, such as those
contained in Title 42, Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter IV (Health
Care Financing Administration) and Title 21, Code of Federal Regulations,
Chapter I (Food and Drug Administration);
•
Consultation with provider organizations, academic and
professional specialists pertinent to the specific service;
•
Reference to current medical literature.
However, if the Plan denies or delays coverage for your requested service on
the basis that it is an Experimental Service or Investigational Service and you
meet all the qualifications set out below, the Plan must provide an opportunity
for you to request an external, independent review.
Qualifications
1. You must have a Life-Threatening or Seriously Debilitating condition.
2. Your Health Care Provider must certify to the Plan that you have a Life
Threatening or Seriously Debilitating condition for which standard therapies
have not been effective in improving your condition, or are otherwise medically
inappropriate, or there is no more beneficial standard therapy covered by the
Plan.
3. Either (a) your Health Care Provider, who has a contract with or is employed
by the Plan, has recommended a drug, device, procedure, or other therapy
that the Health Care Provider certifies in writing is likely to be more beneficial to
you than any available standard therapies, or (b) you or your Health Care
Provider, who is a licensed, board-certified, or board-eligible physician qualified
to practice in the area of practice appropriate to treat your condition, has
requested a therapy that, based on two documents from acceptable medical
and scientific evidence, is likely to be more beneficial for you than any
available standard therapy.
4. You have been denied coverage by the Plan for the recommended or
requested service.
5. If not for the Plan’s determination that the recommended or requested
service is an Experimental Service or Investigational Service, it would be
covered.
External, Independent Review Process
If the Plan denies coverage of the recommended or requested therapy and
you meet all of the qualifications, the Plan will notify you within five business
days of its decision and your opportunity to request external review of the Plan’s
decision. If your Health Care Provider determines that the proposed service
would be significantly less effective if not promptly initiated, you may request
expedited review and the experts on the external review panel will render a
Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

9

General exclusions and limitations
decision within seven days of your request. If the external review panel
recommends that the Plan cover the recommended or requested service,
coverage for the services will be subject to the terms and conditions generally
applicable to other benefits to which you are entitled.
DMHC’s Independent Medical Review (IMR)
This exclusion does not limit, prohibit, or modify a Member’s rights to an IMR from
the DMHC as described in the EOC in the Independent Medical Review
section. In certain circumstances, you do not have to participate in the Plan’s
grievance or appeals process before requesting an IMR of denials for
Experimental Services or Investigational Services. In such cases you may
immediately contact the DMHC to request an IMR of this denial. See the
California Department of Managed Health Care review section.
8

Vision Care. This Plan does not cover Vision Services, except as described in the
EOC in the Prosthetic equipment and devices section or as required by law.

9

Hearing Aids. This Plan does not cover hearing aids, except as described in the
Hearing aid services rider if selected by your Employer as an optional Benefit, or
as required by law.

10

Immunizations. This Plan does not cover non-Medically Necessary or nonpreventive immunizations solely for foreign travel or occupational purposes,
except as required by law.

11

Non-licensed or Non-certified Providers. This Plan does not cover treatments or
services rendered by a non-licensed or non-certified Health Care Provider,
except as described in the EOC in the Mental Health or Substance Use Disorder
Benefits section or as required by law. This exclusion does not apply to Medically
Necessary treatment of a Mental Health or Substance Use Disorder furnished or
delivered by, or under the direction of, a Health Care Provider acting within the
scope of practice of the provider’s license or certification under applicable
state law.

12

Private Duty Nursing. This Plan does not cover private duty nursing in the home,
hospital, or long-term care facility, except as described in the EOC in the
Hospice program services section or as required by law.

13

Personal or Comfort Items. This Plan does not cover personal or comfort items,
such as internet, telephones, personal hygiene items, food delivery services, or
services to help with personal care, except as required by law.

14

Reversal of Voluntary Sterilization. This Plan does not cover reversal of voluntary
sterilization, except for Medically Necessary treatment of medical
complications, except as required by law.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

10

General exclusions and limitations
15

Surrogate Pregnancy. This Plan does not cover testing, services, or supplies for a
person who is not covered under this Plan for a surrogate pregnancy, except as
required by law.
Therapies. This Plan does not cover the following physical and occupational
therapies, except as described in the EOC in the Rehabilitative and habilitative
services section or as required by law:

16

•
•
•
•

Massage therapy, unless it is a component of a treatment plan;
Training or therapy for the treatment of learning disabilities or behavioral
problems;
Social skills training or therapy; and
Vocational, educational, recreational, art, dance, music, or reading
therapy.

17

Routine Physical Examination. The Plan does not cover physical examinations
for the sole purpose of travel, insurance, licensing, employment, school, camp,
court-ordered examinations, pre-participation examination for athletic
programs, or other non-preventive purpose, except as required by law.

18

Travel and Lodging. This Plan does not cover transportation, mileage, lodging,
meals, and other Member-related travel costs, except for licensed ambulance
or psychiatric transport as described in the EOC in the Ambulance services
section, as otherwise described in the EOC in the Bariatric surgery Benefits and
Transplant services sections, or as required by law.

19

Weight Control Programs and Exercise Programs. This Plan does not cover
weight control programs and exercise programs, except as described in the
EOC in the Diabetes care services section or as required by law.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

11

Prepayments fees
Your Employer is responsible for a monthly payment to Blue Shield for health care
coverage for the Subscriber and any enrolled Dependents. This monthly payment is a
Premium. Any amount the Subscriber must contribute to the Premium is set by your
Employer.
The contract states the monthly Premiums for this plan for the Subscriber and any
enrolled Dependents. Blue Shield will give your Employer written notice of Premium or
coverage changes. We will send this notice at least 60 days prior to plan renewal or the
effective date of the Benefit change. Your Employer is responsible for letting you know
of any changes. Benefits provided after the effective date of any change will be
subject to the change. There is no vested right to obtain the original Benefits.

Other charges
Your Cost Share is the amount you pay for Covered Benefits. It is your portion of the Blue
Shield Allowable Amount.
Your Cost Share includes any:
•
•
•

Deductible;
Copayment amount; and
Coinsurance amount.

Allowable Amount
The Allowable Amount is the maximum amount Blue Shield will pay for Covered
Benefits, or the provider’s billed charge for those Covered Benefits, whichever is less.
Blue Shield’s payment to the provider is the difference between the Allowable
Amount and your Cost Share.
Participating Providers agree to accept the Allowable Amount as payment in full for
Covered Benefits, except as stated in the Exception for other coverage and
Reductions – third party liability sections of the EOC. When you see a Participating
Provider, you are responsible for your Cost Share.
Generally, Blue Shield will pay its portion of the Allowable Amount and you will pay
your Cost Share. If there is a payment dispute between Blue Shield and a
Participating Provider over Covered Benefits you receive, the Participating Provider
must resolve that dispute with Blue Shield. You are not required to pay for Blue
Shield’s portion of the Allowable Amount. You are only required to pay your Cost
Share for those services.
Non-Participating Providers do not agree to accept the Allowable Amount as
payment in full for Covered Benefits. When you see a Non-Participating Provider, you
are responsible for:
•
•

Your Cost Share; and
All charges over the Allowable Amount.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

12

Calendar Year Deductible
The Deductible is the amount you pay each Calendar Year for Covered Benefits
before Blue Shield begins payment. Blue Shield will pay for some Covered Benefits
before you meet your Deductible.
Amounts you pay toward your Deductible count toward your Out-of-Pocket
Maximum.
Amounts you pay over the Allowable Amount do not count toward your Deductible.
Some plans do not have a Deductible. For plans that do, there may be separate
Deductibles for:
•
•

An individual Member and an entire Family; and
Participating Providers and Non-Participating Providers.

If you have a Family plan, there is an individual Deductible within the Family
Deductible. This means an individual family member can meet the individual
Deductible before the entire Family meets the Family Deductible.
If you have an individual plan and you enroll a Dependent, your plan will become a
Family plan. Any amount you have paid toward the Deductible for your individual
plan will be applied to both the individual Deductible and the Family Deductible for
your new plan.
See the Summary of Benefits for details on which Covered Benefits are subject to the
Deductible and how the Deductible works for your plan.
Prior carrier Deductible credit
If you pay all or part of a Deductible for another Employer-sponsored health plan
in the same Calendar Year you enroll in this plan, that amount will be applied to
this plan’s Deductible if:
•

•
•

You were enrolled in an Employer-sponsored health plan with another
carrier during the same Calendar Year this contract becomes effective
and you enroll as of the original effective date of coverage under this
contract;
You were enrolled in another Blue Shield plan sponsored by the same
Employer which this plan is replacing; or
You were enrolled in another Blue Shield plan sponsored by the same
Employer and you are transferring to this plan during open enrollment.

Copayment and Coinsurance
A Covered Benefit may have a Copayment or a Coinsurance. A Copayment is a
specific dollar amount you pay for a Covered Benefit. A Coinsurance is a
percentage of the Allowable Amount you pay for a Covered Benefit.
Your provider will ask you to pay your Copayment or Coinsurance at the time of
service. For Covered Benefits that are subject to your plan’s Deductible, you are also
responsible for all costs up to the Allowable Amount until you reach your Deductible.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

13
You will continue to pay the Copayment or Coinsurance for each Covered Benefit
you receive until you reach your Out-of-Pocket Maximum.

Calendar Year Out-of-Pocket Maximum
The Out-of-Pocket Maximum is the most you are required to pay in Cost Share for
Covered Benefits in a Calendar Year. Your Cost Share includes Deductible,
Copayment, and Coinsurance and these count toward your Out-of-Pocket
Maximum, except as listed below. Once you reach your Out-of-Pocket Maximum,
Blue Shield will pay 100% of the Allowable Amount for Covered Benefits for the rest of
the Calendar Year.
Some plans may have a separate Out-of-Pocket Maximum for:
•
•
•

An individual Member and an entire Family;
Participating Providers and Non-Participating Providers; and
Participating Providers and combined Participating and Non-Participating
Providers.

If you have a Family plan, there is an individual Out-of-Pocket Maximum within the
Family Out-of-Pocket Maximum. This means an individual family member can meet
the individual Out-of-Pocket Maximum before the entire Family meets the Family
Out-of-Pocket Maximum.
If you have an individual plan and you enroll a Dependent, your plan will become a
Family plan. Any amount you have paid toward the Out-of-Pocket Maximum for your
individual plan will be applied to both the individual Out-of-Pocket Maximum and
the Family Out-of-Pocket Maximum for your new plan.
The following do not count toward your Out-of-Pocket Maximum:
•
•

Charges for services that are not covered; and
Charges over the Allowable Amount.

You will continue to be responsible for these costs even after you reach your Out-ofPocket Maximum.
See the Summary of Benefits section of the EOC for details on how the Out-of-Pocket
Maximum works for your plan.
Accrual balance
Blue Shield provides a summary of your accrual balances toward your Calendar Year
Deductible, if any, and Out-of-Pocket Maximum for every month in which your
Benefits were used until the full amount has been met. This summary will be mailed to
you unless you opt to receive it electronically or have already opted out of paper
mailings. You can opt back in to receive paper mailings at any time or elect to
receive your balance summary electronically by logging into your member portal
online and updating your communication preferences, or by calling Customer
Service at the number on the back of your ID card. You can also check your accrual
balances at any time by logging into your member portal online, which is updated
daily, or calling Customer Service. Your accrual balance information is updated
once a claim is received and processed and may not reflect recent services.
Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

14

Choice of Physicians and providers
This plan covers care from Participating Providers and Non-Participating Providers. You
do not need a referral. However, some services do require prior authorization.

Participating Providers
Participating Providers have a contract with Blue Shield and agree to accept
Blue Shield’s Allowable Amount as payment in full for Covered Benefits. As a
result, your Cost Share is less when you receive Covered Benefits from a
Participating Provider.
Some services will not be covered unless you receive them from a Participating
Provider. See the Summary of Benefits section of the EOC to find out which
Covered Benefits must be received from a Participating Provider.
If a provider leaves this plan’s network, the status of the provider will change
from Participating to Non-Participating.

Non-Participating Providers
Non-Participating Providers do not have a contract with Blue Shield to accept
Blue Shield’s Allowable Amount as payment in full for Covered Benefits. Except
for Emergency Services, services received at a Participating Provider facility
(Hospital, Ambulatory Surgery Center, laboratory, radiology center, imaging
center, or certain other outpatient settings) under certain conditions, and
services provided by a 988 center, Mobile Crisis Team, or other provider of
Behavioral Health Crisis Services, you will pay more for Covered Benefits from a
Non-Participating Provider.
Non-Participating Providers at a Participating Provider facility
When you receive care at a Participating Provider facility, some Covered
Benefits may be provided by a Non-Participating Provider. If it was not your
choice to see a Non-Participating Provider for these services, your Cost Share
will be the same as the amount due to a Participating Provider under similar
circumstances, and you will not be responsible for additional charges above
the Allowable Amount, unless the Non-Participating Provider provides you
written notice of what they may charge and you consent to those terms.
If you cannot find a Participating Provider
Call Customer Service if you need help finding a Participating Provider who
can provide the care you need close to home. If a Participating Provider is
not available, you can ask to see a Non-Participating Provider at the
Participating Provider Cost Share. If the services cannot reasonably be

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

15
obtained from a Participating Provider, we will approve your request and
you will only be responsible for the Participating Provider Cost Share.

Second medical opinion
You can consult a Participating or Non-Participating Provider for a second medical
opinion in situations including but not limited to:
•
•
•
•
•
•

You have questions about the reasonableness or necessity of the treatment plan;
There are different treatment options for your medical condition;
Your diagnosis is unclear;
Your condition has not improved after completing the prescribed course of
treatment;
You need additional information before deciding on a treatment plan; or
You have questions about your diagnosis or treatment plan.

You do not need prior authorization from Blue Shield or your Primary Care Physician for a
second medical opinion.

Continuity of care
Continuity of care may be available if:
•
•

Blue Shield no longer contracts with your Former Participating Provider for the
services you are receiving; or
You are a newly-covered Member whose previous health plan was withdrawn
from the market.

Continuity of care may also be available to you when your Employer terminates its
contract with Blue Shield and contracts with a new health plan (insurer) that does not
include your Blue Shield Participating Provider in its network.
If your Former Participating Provider is no longer available to you for one of the reasons
noted above, Blue Shield will notify you of the option to continue treatment with your
Former Participating Provider.
You can request to continue treatment with your Former Participating Provider in the
situations described above if you are currently receiving the following care:

Continuity of care with a Former Participating Provider
Qualifying conditions
Undergoing a course of institutional or
inpatient care

Timeframe
90 days from the date of receipt of
notice of the termination of the Former
Participating Provider’s contract, the
Employer’s contract, or until the
treatment concludes, whichever is sooner

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

16

Continuity of care with a Former Participating Provider
Qualifying conditions

Timeframe

Acute conditions

As long as the condition lasts

Maternal mental health condition

12 months after the condition’s diagnosis
or 12 months after the end of the
pregnancy, whichever is later

Ongoing pregnancy care, including care
immediately after giving birth

Up to 12 months

Recommended surgery or procedure
documented to occur within 180 days

Within 180 days

Ongoing treatment for a child up to 36
months old

Up to 12 months

Serious chronic condition

Up to 12 months

Terminal illness

The duration of the terminal illness

If a condition falls within a qualifying condition under federal and state law, the more
generous time frames would be followed.
To request continuity of care, visit blueshieldca.com and fill out the Continuity of Care
Application. Blue Shield will confirm your eligibility and may review your request for
Medical Necessity.
Under Federal law, the Former Participating Provider must accept Blue Shield’s
Allowable Amount as payment in full for the first 90 days of your ongoing care. Once
the provider accepts and your request is authorized, you may continue to see the
Former Participating Provider at the Participating Provider Cost Share.

Care outside of California
If you need medical care while traveling outside of California, you’re covered. Blue
Shield has relationships with health plans in other states, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands through the BlueCard® Program. The Blue Cross Blue Shield Association can help
you access care from participating and non-participating providers in those
geographic areas.
See the Out-of-area services section of the EOC for more
information about receiving care while outside of California.
To find participating providers while outside of California,
visit bcbs.com.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

17

Emergency Services
If you have a medical emergency, call 911 or seek immediate
medical attention at the nearest hospital.

The Benefits of this plan will be provided anywhere in the world for treatment of an
Emergency Medical Condition or a Psychiatric Emergency Medical Condition.
Emergency Services are covered at the Participating Provider Cost Share, even if you
receive treatment from a Non-Participating Provider.
After you receive care, Blue Shield will review your claim for Emergency Services to
determine if your condition was in fact an Emergency Medical Condition or a
Psychiatric Emergency Medical Condition. If you did not require Emergency Services
and did not reasonably believe an emergency existed, you will be responsible for the
Participating or Non-Participating Provider Cost Share for that non-emergency Covered
Service.

Reimbursement provisions
When you see a Participating Provider, your provider submits the claim to Blue Shield.
When you see a Non-Participating Provider, you must submit the claim to Blue Shield or
the Benefit Administrator.
Claim forms are available at blueshieldca.com or by contacting the Benefit
Administrator. Please submit your claim form and medical records within one year of
the service date.
Blue Shield or the Benefit Administrator will process your claim within 30 calendar days
of receipt if it is not missing any required information. If your claim is missing any required
information, you or your provider will be notified and asked to submit the missing
information. Blue Shield cannot process your claim until we receive the missing
information. Once the missing information is received, Blue Shield will have 30 calendar
days to process your claim.
Once your claim is processed, you will receive an explanation of your Benefits. For each
service, the explanation will list your Cost Share and the payment made by Blue Shield
or the Benefit Administrator to the provider.
When you receive Covered Benefits from a Non-Participating Provider, Blue Shield or
the Benefit Administrator may send the payment to the Subscriber, or directly to the
Non-Participating Provider.
The Subscriber must make sure the Non-Participating Provider
receives the full billed amount for non-emergency services,
whether or not Blue Shield makes payment to the NonParticipating Provider.
Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

18

Facilities
Visit blueshieldca.com or use the Blue Shield mobile app and
click on Find a Doctor for a list of your plan’s Participating
Providers.

We update our provider directories periodically to reflect changes in our provider
networks. It is the Member’s obligation to verify whether the provider chosen is a
Participating Provider prior to obtaining coverage.
For the most up-to-date listings, check our online directories in the Find a Doctor section
of blueshieldca.com or by calling Customer Service.

Renewal provisions
Blue Shield has the right to change the Benefits and terms of this plan as the law
permits. This includes, but is not limited to, changes to:
•
•
•
•
•

Terms and conditions;
Benefits;
Cost Shares;
Premiums; and
Limitations and exclusions.

Blue Shield will give your Employer written notice of Premium or coverage changes. We
will send this notice at least 60 days prior to plan renewal or the effective date of the
Benefit change. Your Employer is responsible for letting you know of any changes.
Benefits provided after the effective date of any change will be subject to the change.
There is no vested right to obtain the original Benefits.

Individual continuation of Benefts
If your employment with your current Employer ends, you and any covered
Dependents may qualify for continued group coverage under the Consolidated
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1985. See the Continuation of group
coverage section of the EOC for more information on COBRA continuation coverage.

Termination of Benefits
Your coverage will end if:
•
•
•

Your Employer cancels or does not renew coverage;
The Subscriber cancels coverage; or
Blue Shield cancels or rescinds coverage.

Please refer to the EOC for additional information.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

19

If your Employer cancels coverage
Your Employer may cancel coverage at any time. To cancel coverage, your
Employer must provide written notice to Blue Shield and its Employees.

If the Subscriber cancels coverage
If the Subscriber decides to cancel coverage, coverage will end at 11:59 p.m.
Pacific Time on a date determined by your Employer.
Reinstatement
If the Subscriber voluntarily cancels coverage, the Subscriber can contact the
Employer for reinstatement options.

If Blue Shield cancels coverage
Blue Shield can cancel coverage if:
•
•
•
•

You are no longer eligible for coverage in this plan;
Your Employer fails to meet Blue Shield’s Employer eligibility, participation,
and contribution requirements;
Blue Shield terminates this plan; or
You or your Employer commit fraud or intentional misrepresentation of
material fact.

Blue Shield will provide 30 days’ advance written notice of cancellation of coverage
to your Employer if your Employer fails to meet Blue Shield’s Employer eligibility,
participation, and contribution requirements. It is your Employer’s responsibility to
provide a copy of the notice to its Employees.

Cancellation for Employer’s nonpayment of Premiums
Blue Shield can cancel coverage if your Employer does not pay the required
Premiums in full and on time. Your Employer is responsible for all Premiums during the
term of coverage, including the 30-day grace period. If Blue Shield cancels
coverage due to nonpayment of Premiums, Blue Shield will send a Notice of End of
Coverage to you and your Employer no later than five calendar days after the date
coverage ends.

Cancellation or rescission for fraud or intentional misrepresentation of material
fact
Blue Shield may cancel or rescind your coverage if you, your Dependent, or your
Employer commit fraud or intentional misrepresentation of material fact. It is your
Employer’s responsibility to notify you if the Contract is rescinded or canceled.
Rescission voids the Contract as if it never existed. Blue Shield will send the Notice of
Cancellation, Rescission or Nonrenewal to your Employer prior to any rescission. The
Employer must provide enrolled Employees with a copy of the Notice of
Cancellation, Rescission or Nonrenewal and the Notice of End of Coverage.

Questions? Visit blueshieldca.com, use the Blue Shield mobile app, or call Customer Service at (888) 2561915.

